---
layout: post
title:  "Module os"
date:   2017-07-23 14:39:48 +0100
categories: basic-python
---

Today we are going to deal a bit more with a new Python module `os`. This module can command the operative system, from moving directories to run programs. That's why I would like to introduce you a bit more into it.
At the moment I am running on a Ubuntu system, but I will test asap on Windows


# OS module

###Create a new directory

Let's write on a new file :
{% highlight python %}
import os
os.mkdir("my_directory")
{% endhighlight %}

Save it as `directorymaker.py` and run in the prompt. If you see the script will create a new directory, called `my_directory`, in the current folder. The key command is `os.mkdir(DIRECTORY_NAME)` which invokes the function `mkdir` to create a director in the folder you are.

###Change the current directory

Open a new file and type:
{% highlight python %}
import os
cwd = os.getcwd() 
print("Here we are\n")
print(cwd)
new = os.chdir("../")
print("Here we went up of one level\n")
cwd = os.getcwd()
print(cwd)
new = os.chdir(os.pardir)
print("Here we came back to the original directory\n")
cwd = os.getcwd()
print(cwd)
{% endhighlight %}

Save as "changedirectory.py" and run it. This is a powerful command we are giving to os: `chdir`, namely change directory. It will happend that in your projects you will have to deal with multiple directories, saving files back and forth without remembering where you are. Let's analyse the script:
- `cwd =os.getcwd()` : `getcwd()` - NB with the brackets - return the actual folder we are working at the moment. Indeed, `cwd` is for `current working directory`
- `new = os.chdir("../")`: `chdir(../)` can change the directory. Here we went up to one level with respect to the directory we were. We can go up to n-th level just typing as many `..` as we want to go up. For example, you are working in the directory `python`. `python` is in the directory `tutorial` which is in the directory `learning` on the `Desktop`. Thus, if we type `os.chdir("../")` we will go from python to tutorial. 
if we are in python and we type `os.chdir("../../../../")` we will end to be in the `Desktop`.
If you want to go to a specific folder you can give the `absolute path` of the folder. In Windows the absolute path can be found by looking at the folder property - right click on the folder and then select property. Usually an absolute path is somethin like `C:\Steboss\Myfolder\YourFolder\Desktop\`.
Thus if I want to go directly to the desktop from the folder `python`, I could type : `os.chdir("C:\Steboss\Myfolder\YourFolder\Desktop\")`
-`new=os.chdir(os.pardir)` : what's interesting is that `os` can remember the starting working directory as `os.pardir` command show. Thus, giving this command we will be back to the original working directory.

###Rename directories or files:

Another important features of `os` is renaming : 
{% highlight python %}
import os
os.makedirs("rename_dirs")
os.rename("rename_dirs","delete_dirs")
{% endhighlight %}
In this script we are using:
-`os.makedirs("rename_dirs")` : the `makedirs` function which allow us to create as many directories and subdirectories we want. For example, `os.makedirs("dir_1/dir_2/dir_3/dir_4")` will create `dir_1` along with all the sub-sub-sub directories `dir_2`,`dir_3` and `dir_4`. 
-`os.rename("rename_dirs","delete_dirs")`: `rename` take as input a source, `src`, directory or file and the destination, `dst`, directory or file renaming `src` into `dst`. 

###Directories and file removal

Be careful. The following code is tested, but always check before using it. I don't want to remove any of your files:
{% highlight python %}
import os
#create 4 subdirectories
os.makedirs("test/directory/to/remove") 
#now remove them
os.removedirs("test/directory/to/remove")
{% endhighlight}

Here we made use of:
-`os.removedirs("test/directory/to/remove")`: with this command we can delete all the subdirectories we want. This is an extremelly important command. I remember when I was a guy playing with a camera software and getting crazy of finding a way to clean all the directories I used plenty of useless photos. By combining all the `os` elements we can have a very good friend to work with.


###Working with files

We will see deeper the I/O file aspects very soon, but for the moment let's try to use `os` to deal with files `attributes`, namely the file properties
{% highlight python %}
import os
import time #for this example we need time module as well

#suppose you have a file called test.dat in test folder
file = "test/test.dat"

#we can get the file properties:
mode, ino, dev, nlink, uid, gid, size, atime, mtime, ctime = os.stat(file)
#I know it's quite a lot of variables, but it can save time
print("The size of the file in bytes:")
print(size)
print("The file was created:")
print(time.ctime(ctime))
#ctie refers to computer time and time module is able to read it correctly and
#giving it back in a human-readable format
print("Last access to the file:")
print(time.ctime(atime))
print("Last modification time:")
print(time.ctime(mtime))
{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, the script above could have been done in this way:
{% highlight python %}
import os
import time #for this example we need time module as well

#suppose you have a file called test.dat in test folder
file = "test/test.dat"

statistics = os.stat(file)

#give the size in bytes
print("File size in bytes:")
print(statistics.st_size)
#give the creation date
print("The file was created:")
print(time.ctime(statstics.st_ctime))
#last access
print("Last access to the file:")
print(time.ctime(statistics.st_atime))
#last modification
print("Last modification time:")
print(time.ctime(statistics.st_mtime))
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see with `os` we can retrieved a big number of information from files. We can rename them, understand when they've been created and their size. Coupling `os` with `for` and `if` give us a potential tool for cleaning our computer, for example: delete all the file I have created in this folder on the 22nd July 2017.


###Os to start a new Python script

`os` can be used also to start a Python script in parallel to the one we are running :
{% highlight python %}
import os 

os.system("python myprogram.py")
{% endhighligth %}

`os.system(COMMAND)` deals with the prompt and launch the command we have written. **This is surely true for Unix based system** I need to verify if also for Windows. In this scirpt we are saying to `os` that we want to run a Python program called `myprogram.py`
Alternatively in Windows you could try to run it in this way:
{% highlight python %}
import os
import sys

program = "python"
arguments = ["myprogram.py"]

print os.execvp(program,(program,) + tuple(arguments))
{% endhighlight %}

ADD EXPLANATION

###Os for running Windows programs

Suppose you have a program "photo.exe" which take a pictures from your webcam. You can run it in Python via `os`:
{% highlight pyhton %}
import os
import string

program = "photo"
for path in string.split(os.environ["PATH"],os.pathsep):
    file = os.path.join(path,program) + ".exe"
    try:
        return os.spawnv(os.P_WAIT,file)
    except os.error:
        pass
{% endhighlight %}

We will come back very soon on this program. At the moment it's too early to explain it